docs/Style-guide.md, before:

Haskell Style Guide
============================
> This style guide is mostly a copy of [Johan Tibell's guide](https://github.com/tibbe/haskell-style-guide/blob/master/haskell-style.md)
> with some restructurization, elaboration on some topics and some additions.
> This style guide's aims are code beauty, readability and understandability.


Principles
----------
* The primary goal is readability/maintainability with performance as a close second.
* Always use types to clarify intent and make invalid states unrepresentable.
* Use type signatures as compiler checked documentation.
* Break up large functions into smaller sub functions.
* When modifying or adding code to existing code (either at the file, project or company level), try to match the style of the existing code.

General guide lines
-------------------
### Line Length

Maximum line length is *80 characters* or *100 characters* if necessary.

Modern screens have high definition and big width.
But with some tiling managers and two terminals on one screen you are not able to
see many characters on one line.
On the other hand, restricting line size to a very small number like 80 leads to
some crazy indentation despite the fact that
shorter lines should force you to write well structured code.
That's why *100* is a reasonable compromise.


### Indentation

* Do not vertically align code. Mainly because the need to change identifiers and re-aligning the other lines causes semantically null changes in the diff.
* Tabs are illegal.
* Use spaces for indenting.
* Indent your code blocks with *2 spaces*.
* Indent the `where` keyword with one space to set it
apart from the rest of the code and indent the definitions in a
`where` clause with 1 space.

Some examples:

```haskell
sayHello :: IO ()
sayHello = do
  name <- getLine
  putStrLn $ greeting name
 where
  greeting :: String -> String
  greeting name = "Hello, " ++ name ++ "!"

filter :: (a -> Bool) -> [a] -> [a]
filter _ [] = []
filter p (x:xs)
  | p x = x : filter p xs
  | otherwise = filter p xs
```

### Blank Lines

* One blank line between top-level definitions.
* No blank lines between type signatures and function definitions.
* Add one blank line between
functions in a type class instance declaration if the function bodies
are large.
* You can add blank lines inside a big `do` block to separate logical
parts of it.
* You can also use blank lines to separate definitions inside `where`
clause, if necessary.

### Whitespace

* Surround binary operators with a single space on either side. In case of
currying add one space between the argument and the operation.

* Use some tool to remove trailing spaces.

### Naming convention

**Casing**:

+ **_lowerCamelCase_** for function and variable names.
+ **_UpperCamelCase_** for types.

* Don't use short names like `n`, `sk`, `f` unless their meaning is clear from
context (function name, types, other variables, etc.).

* For readability reasons, don't capitalize all letters when using an
abbreviation.  For example, write `HttpServer` instead of
`HTTPServer`.  Exception: two or three letter abbreviations, e.g. `IO`, `STM`.

**Records name conventions**

If data type has only one constructor then this data type name should be the same
as constructor name (also applies to `newtype`).

```haskell
data User = User Int String
```

**Field names for record data types**

Choose a reasonable prefix is used such that we can ensure the field name will remain unique throughout the package. Use your discretion.

e.g
```haskell
data MempoolEnv m blk = MempoolEnv
  { meLedger :: LedgerInterface m blk
  , meLedgerCfg :: LedgerConfig blk
  , meStateVar :: StrictTVar m (InternalState blk)
  , meTracer :: Tracer m (TraceEventMempool blk)
  }
```

### Comments

#### Punctuation

Write proper sentences; start with a capital letter and use proper
punctuation.

#### Top-Level Definitions

* Comment top level functions (particularly exported functions)
as much as possible. If it is not blindingly obvious what a function
is doing, you should add a comment.
* Always provide a type signature
* Use Haddock syntax in the comments.
* Comment every exported data type.

Function example:

```haskell
-- | Send a message on a socket. The socket must be in a connected
-- state. Returns the number of bytes sent. Applications are
-- responsible for ensuring that all data has been sent.
send
  :: Socket      -- ^ Connected socket
  -> ByteString  -- ^ Data to send
  -> IO Int      -- ^ Bytes sent
```

* For functions, the documentation should give enough information to
apply the function without looking at its definition.

Record example:

```haskell
-- | Bla bla bla.
data Person = Person
  { age :: !Int     -- ^ Age
  , name :: !String  -- ^ First name
  }
```

For fields that require longer comments, format them this way:

```haskell
data Record = Record
  { -- | This is a very very very long comment that is split over
    -- multiple lines.
    field1 :: !Text

    -- | This is a second very very very long comment that is split
    -- over multiple lines.
  , field2 :: !Int
  }
```

#### End-of-Line Comments

Separate end-of-line comments from the code with 2 spaces. Align
comments for data type definitions. Some examples:

```haskell
data Parser =
  Parser
    !Int         -- ^ Current position
    !ByteString  -- ^ Remaining input

foo :: Int -> Int
foo n = salt * 32 + 9
  where
    salt = 453645243  -- Magic hash salt.
```

#### Links

Use in-line links economically.  You are encouraged to add links for
API names. It is not necessary to add links for all API names in a
Haddock comment. We therefore recommend adding a link to an API name
if:

* The user might actually want to click on it for more information (in
  your opinion), and

* Only for the first occurrence of each API name in the comment (don't
  bother repeating a link)

Top-down guideline
------------------

### LANGUAGE extensions section

Write each `LANGUAGE` pragma on its own line, sort them alphabetically.
_Do not_ align by max width as future re-alignment when adding new pragmas
will cause semantically null changes in the diff.

```haskell
{-# LANGUAGE FlexibleContexts #-}
{-# LANGUAGE Rank2Types #-}
{-# LANGUAGE TemplateHaskell #-}
```

### Module name

Use singular when naming modules (e.g. use `Data.Map` and
`Data.ByteString.Internal` instead of `Data.Maps` and
`Data.ByteString.Internals`). Sometimes it's acceptable to use plural
(e. g. `Types`, `Instances`).

### Export Lists

Format export lists as follows:

```haskell
module Data.Set
  ( Set
  , empty
  , singleton
  , member
  ) where
```

Some clarifications:

1. Use 2 spaces indentation for export list.
2. You can split export list into sections or just write all as single section.
3. It is strongly advised to sort each section alphabetically. However,
   classes, data types and type aliases should be written before
   functions.

### Imports

Imports should be grouped in the following order:

0. Import of custom prelude (for example [`cardano-prelude`](https://github.com/input-output-hk/cardano-prelude)) if used.
1. External modules.
2. External IOHK modules.
3. Local library modules.
4. Local test modules

* Put a blank line between each group of imports.

* The imports in each group should be sorted alphabetically, by module name.

* For external modules, use explicit or `qualified` imports.
* For local modules, use implicit imports.
* Always use explicit import lists or `qualified` imports.
  * **Exception**:
   [`cardano-prelude`](https://github.com/input-output-hk/cardano-prelude) (import implicitly)

If the `import` is unqualified then put _11 spaces_ between the `import` keyword and the module name (i.e. length of `qualified` + 2).

Unqualified types (i.e. `Map` vs. `M.Map`) look pretty good and not so ugly.
Prefer two-line imports for such standard containers.

```haskell
import           Data.Map.Strict (Map)
import qualified Data.Map.Strict as Map
```

### Data Declarations

Align the constructors in a data type definition.  Example:

```haskell
data HttpException
  = InvalidStatusCode Int
  | MissingContentHeader
```

Format records as follows:

```haskell
data Person = Person
  { firstName :: !String  -- ^ First name
  , lastName :: !String  -- ^ Last name
  , age :: !Int     -- ^ Age
  } deriving (Eq, Show)
```

Type classes in `deriving` section should be always surrounded by
parentheses.

_WARNING_: try to avoid aggressive autoderiving. Deriving instances can
slowdown compilation
(stated here: http://www.stephendiehl.com/posts/production.html)

> Deriving instances of Read/Show/Data/Generic for largely recursive ADTs can
> sometimes lead to quadratic memory behavior when the nesting gets deep.

### Function declaration

* All functions must have type signatures.

* Specialize function type signature for concrete types if you're using this function
with only one type for each argument. Otherwise you should use more polymorphic
version. Compiler can optimize specialized functions better
and meaning of this function may be clearer.
Use this rule unless you are the library creator and want your library to be abstract
as possible.

* It is allowed to omit parentheses for only one type class constraint.

* If a function type signature is very long then place some of the types on its own line.

Example :
```haskell
putValueInState
  :: MonadIO m
  => UserState -> Maybe Int -> AppConfig
  -> Integer -> (Int -> m ()) -> m ()
```


### List Declarations

Align the elements in the list.  Example:

```haskell
exceptions =
  [ InvalidStatusCode
  , MissingContentHeader
  , InternalServerError
  ]
```

### If-then-else clauses

Generally, guards and pattern matches should be preferred over _if-then-else_
clauses, where possible.  Short cases should usually be put on a single line
(when line length allows it).

### Case expressions

The alternatives in a case expression can be indented using either of
the two following styles:

```haskell
foobar =
  case something of
    Just j -> foo
    Nothing -> bar
```

or as

```haskell
foobar = case something of
           Just j -> foo
           Nothing -> bar
```

but not

```haskell
foobar = case something of
    Just j  -> foo
    Nothing -> bar
```
Subexpressions should always be indented to the right of their parent expression.

Dealing with laziness
---------------------

By default, use strict data types and lazy functions.

### Data types

Constructor fields should be strict, unless there's an explicit reason
to make them lazy.  This helps to avoid many common pitfalls caused by too much
laziness and reduces the number of brain cycles the programmer has to
spend thinking about evaluation order.

```haskell
-- Good
data Point = Point
  { pointX :: !Double  -- ^ X coordinate
  , pointY :: !Double  -- ^ Y coordinate
  }
```

```haskell
-- Bad
data Point = Point
  { pointX :: Double  -- ^ X coordinate
  , pointY :: Double  -- ^ Y coordinate
  }
```

Misc
----

### Multi-line string literals ###

Multi-line string literals like this should be avoided because it can interact badly with some language extensions like `CPP`:

```haskell
foo = "The quick brown fox jumps \
  \over the lazy dog"
```

Instead do one of the following:

Use `mconcat`:

```haskell
foo = mconcat
  [ "The quick brown fox jumps "
  , "over the lazy dog"
  ]
```

The above is preferred because it makes it easy to maintain the two-space indent and allows the use of `$` where other options do not.

For example:

```haskell
foo = mconcat
  [ "The quick brown fox jumps "
  , Text.pack $ reverse "over the lazy dog"
  ]
```

Use `(<>)`, keeping argument and operator aligned to two-spaces:

```haskell
foo = Text.pack
  (   "The quick brown fox jumps "
  <>  "over the lazy dog"
  )
```

### Point-free style ###

Avoid over-using point-free style. Again, use your discretion.

For example, this is hard to read:

```haskell
-- Bad:
f = (g .) . h
```
Whereas this is fine:

```haskell
unFooBar :: Foo -> Baz
unFooBar = Baz . unBar . unFoo
```
The point-free version needs to have a clarity benefit but we realize
that this is vague so use your discretion.

Cabal file formatting
---------------------

### Modules & libraries

Modules and libraries should go in alphabetical order inside corresponding
sections. You can put blank lines between groups in each section.

### Warnings ###

Code should be compilable with `-Wall` without warnings.


### Default extensions

The only allowed default extension is: `NoImplicitPrelude`
All other extensions need to be put in the relevant module.

## Language Extensions to avoid

1. Avoid `RecordWildCards` - use `NamedFieldPuns` instead. `RecordWildCards` makes it difficult to discern where record accessor functions come from, _especially_ when used with external libraries. This results in time wasted searching for the accessors. `NamedFieldPuns` forces you to be more explicit and is a better alternative.


2. Avoid `ViewPatterns` - `ViewPatterns` obfuscates what could have been readable code and incurs more cognitive overhead.

## OPTIONS_GHC pragma to avoid

1. `-Wno-incomplete-uni-patterns` - This a bad idea. GHC will not warn you if you have not explicitly handled all possible cases in your function definitions. This opens up the possibility of a runtime error.

2. `-Wno-partial-fields` - This will allow you to define a partial record accessor which opens you up to the possibility of a runtime error.

Commit message:

Add git hook for styling and linting to Style Guide

docs/Style-guide.md, after:

Haskell Style Guide
============================
> This style guide is mostly a copy of [Johan Tibell's guide](https://github.com/tibbe/haskell-style-guide/blob/master/haskell-style.md)
> with some restructurization, elaboration on some topics and some additions.
> This style guide's aims are code beauty, readability and understandability.


Principles
----------
* The primary goal is readability/maintainability with performance as a close second.
* Always use types to clarify intent and make invalid states unrepresentable.
* Use type signatures as compiler checked documentation.
* Break up large functions into smaller sub functions.
* When modifying or adding code to existing code (either at the file, project or company level), try to match the style of the existing code.

General guide lines
-------------------
### Code linting and formatting tools
`stylish-haskell` is used for automatic code formatting and `hlint` for linting.
Those are configured using `.stylish-haskell.yml` and `.hlint.yml` files in the repository root.
If you would like to check your changes before committing them, you can use the following [`.git/hooks/pre-commit` hook](https://github.com/input-output-hk/cardano-node/blob/master/scripts/githooks/haskell-style-lint).
It requires `stylish-haskell` and `hlint` to be available in `$PATH` and runs against the staged files.

### Line Length

Maximum line length is *80 characters* or *100 characters* if necessary.

Modern screens have high definition and big width.
But with some tiling managers and two terminals on one screen you are not able to
see many characters on one line.
On the other hand, restricting line size to a very small number like 80 leads to
some crazy indentation despite the fact that
shorter lines should force you to write well structured code.
That's why *100* is a reasonable compromise.


### Indentation

* Do not vertically align code. Mainly because the need to change identifiers and re-aligning the other lines causes semantically null changes in the diff.
* Tabs are illegal.
* Use spaces for indenting.
* Indent your code blocks with *2 spaces*.
* Indent the `where` keyword with one space to set it
apart from the rest of the code and indent the definitions in a
`where` clause with 1 space.

Some examples:

```haskell
sayHello :: IO ()
sayHello = do
  name <- getLine
  putStrLn $ greeting name
 where
  greeting :: String -> String
  greeting name = "Hello, " ++ name ++ "!"

filter :: (a -> Bool) -> [a] -> [a]
filter _ [] = []
filter p (x:xs)
  | p x = x : filter p xs
  | otherwise = filter p xs
```

### Blank Lines

* One blank line between top-level definitions.
* No blank lines between type signatures and function definitions.
* Add one blank line between
functions in a type class instance declaration if the function bodies
are large.
* You can add blank lines inside a big `do` block to separate logical
parts of it.
* You can also use blank lines to separate definitions inside `where`
clause, if necessary.

### Whitespace

* Surround binary operators with a single space on either side. In case of
currying add one space between the argument and the operation.

* Use some tool to remove trailing spaces.

### Naming convention

**Casing**:

+ **_lowerCamelCase_** for function and variable names.
+ **_UpperCamelCase_** for types.

* Don't use short names like `n`, `sk`, `f` unless their meaning is clear from
context (function name, types, other variables, etc.).

* For readability reasons, don't capitalize all letters when using an
abbreviation.  For example, write `HttpServer` instead of
`HTTPServer`.  Exception: two or three letter abbreviations, e.g. `IO`, `STM`.

**Records name conventions**

If data type has only one constructor then this data type name should be the same
as constructor name (also applies to `newtype`).

```haskell
data User = User Int String
```

**Field names for record data types**

Choose a reasonable prefix is used such that we can ensure the field name will remain unique throughout the package. Use your discretion.

e.g
```haskell
data MempoolEnv m blk = MempoolEnv
  { meLedger :: LedgerInterface m blk
  , meLedgerCfg :: LedgerConfig blk
  , meStateVar :: StrictTVar m (InternalState blk)
  , meTracer :: Tracer m (TraceEventMempool blk)
  }
```

### Comments

#### Punctuation

Write proper sentences; start with a capital letter and use proper
punctuation.

#### Top-Level Definitions

* Comment top level functions (particularly exported functions)
as much as possible. If it is not blindingly obvious what a function
is doing, you should add a comment.
* Always provide a type signature
* Use Haddock syntax in the comments.
* Comment every exported data type.

Function example:

```haskell
-- | Send a message on a socket. The socket must be in a connected
-- state. Returns the number of bytes sent. Applications are
-- responsible for ensuring that all data has been sent.
send
  :: Socket      -- ^ Connected socket
  -> ByteString  -- ^ Data to send
  -> IO Int      -- ^ Bytes sent
```

* For functions, the documentation should give enough information to
apply the function without looking at its definition.

Record example:

```haskell
-- | Bla bla bla.
data Person = Person
  { age :: !Int     -- ^ Age
  , name :: !String  -- ^ First name
  }
```

For fields that require longer comments, format them this way:

```haskell
data Record = Record
  { -- | This is a very very very long comment that is split over
    -- multiple lines.
    field1 :: !Text

    -- | This is a second very very very long comment that is split
    -- over multiple lines.
  , field2 :: !Int
  }
```

#### End-of-Line Comments

Separate end-of-line comments from the code with 2 spaces. Align
comments for data type definitions. Some examples:

```haskell
data Parser =
  Parser
    !Int         -- ^ Current position
    !ByteString  -- ^ Remaining input

foo :: Int -> Int
foo n = salt * 32 + 9
  where
    salt = 453645243  -- Magic hash salt.
```

#### Links

Use in-line links economically.  You are encouraged to add links for
API names. It is not necessary to add links for all API names in a
Haddock comment. We therefore recommend adding a link to an API name
if:

* The user might actually want to click on it for more information (in
  your opinion), and

* Only for the first occurrence of each API name in the comment (don't
  bother repeating a link)

Top-down guideline
------------------

### LANGUAGE extensions section

Write each `LANGUAGE` pragma on its own line, sort them alphabetically.
_Do not_ align by max width as future re-alignment when adding new pragmas
will cause semantically null changes in the diff.

```haskell
{-# LANGUAGE FlexibleContexts #-}
{-# LANGUAGE Rank2Types #-}
{-# LANGUAGE TemplateHaskell #-}
```

### Module name

Use singular when naming modules (e.g. use `Data.Map` and
`Data.ByteString.Internal` instead of `Data.Maps` and
`Data.ByteString.Internals`). Sometimes it's acceptable to use plural
(e. g. `Types`, `Instances`).

### Export Lists

Format export lists as follows:

```haskell
module Data.Set
  ( Set
  , empty
  , singleton
  , member
  ) where
```

Some clarifications:

1. Use 2 spaces indentation for export list.
2. You can split export list into sections or just write all as single section.
3. It is strongly advised to sort each section alphabetically. However,
   classes, data types and type aliases should be written before
   functions.

### Imports

Imports should be grouped in the following order:

0. Import of custom prelude (for example [`cardano-prelude`](https://github.com/input-output-hk/cardano-prelude)) if used.
1. External modules.
2. External IOHK modules.
3. Local library modules.
4. Local test modules

* Put a blank line between each group of imports.

* The imports in each group should be sorted alphabetically, by module name.

* For external modules, use explicit or `qualified` imports.
* For local modules, use implicit imports.
* Always use explicit import lists or `qualified` imports.
  * **Exception**:
   [`cardano-prelude`](https://github.com/input-output-hk/cardano-prelude) (import implicitly)

If the `import` is unqualified then put _11 spaces_ between the `import` keyword and the module name (i.e. length of `qualified` + 2).

Unqualified types (i.e. `Map` vs. `M.Map`) look pretty good and not so ugly.
Prefer two-line imports for such standard containers.

```haskell
import           Data.Map.Strict (Map)
import qualified Data.Map.Strict as Map
```

### Data Declarations

Align the constructors in a data type definition.  Example:

```haskell
data HttpException
  = InvalidStatusCode Int
  | MissingContentHeader
```

Format records as follows:

```haskell
data Person = Person
  { firstName :: !String  -- ^ First name
  , lastName :: !String  -- ^ Last name
  , age :: !Int     -- ^ Age
  } deriving (Eq, Show)
```

Type classes in `deriving` section should be always surrounded by
parentheses.

_WARNING_: try to avoid aggressive autoderiving. Deriving instances can
slowdown compilation
(stated here: http://www.stephendiehl.com/posts/production.html)

> Deriving instances of Read/Show/Data/Generic for largely recursive ADTs can
> sometimes lead to quadratic memory behavior when the nesting gets deep.

### Function declaration

* All functions must have type signatures.

* Specialize function type signature for concrete types if you're using this function
with only one type for each argument. Otherwise you should use more polymorphic
version. Compiler can optimize specialized functions better
and meaning of this function may be clearer.
Use this rule unless you are the library creator and want your library to be abstract
as possible.

* It is allowed to omit parentheses for only one type class constraint.

* If a function type signature is very long then place some of the types on its own line.

Example :
```haskell
putValueInState
  :: MonadIO m
  => UserState -> Maybe Int -> AppConfig
  -> Integer -> (Int -> m ()) -> m ()
```


### List Declarations

Align the elements in the list.  Example:

```haskell
exceptions =
  [ InvalidStatusCode
  , MissingContentHeader
  , InternalServerError
  ]
```

### If-then-else clauses

Generally, guards and pattern matches should be preferred over _if-then-else_
clauses, where possible.  Short cases should usually be put on a single line
(when line length allows it).

### Case expressions

The alternatives in a case expression can be indented using either of
the two following styles:

```haskell
foobar =
  case something of
    Just j -> foo
    Nothing -> bar
```

or as

```haskell
foobar = case something of
           Just j -> foo
           Nothing -> bar
```

but not

```haskell
foobar = case something of
    Just j  -> foo
    Nothing -> bar
```
Subexpressions should always be indented to the right of their parent expression.

Dealing with laziness
---------------------

By default, use strict data types and lazy functions.

### Data types

Constructor fields should be strict, unless there's an explicit reason
to make them lazy.  This helps to avoid many common pitfalls caused by too much
laziness and reduces the number of brain cycles the programmer has to
spend thinking about evaluation order.

```haskell
-- Good
data Point = Point
  { pointX :: !Double  -- ^ X coordinate
  , pointY :: !Double  -- ^ Y coordinate
  }
```

```haskell
-- Bad
data Point = Point
  { pointX :: Double  -- ^ X coordinate
  , pointY :: Double  -- ^ Y coordinate
  }
```

Misc
----

### Multi-line string literals ###

Multi-line string literals like this should be avoided because it can interact badly with some language extensions like `CPP`:

```haskell
foo = "The quick brown fox jumps \
  \over the lazy dog"
```

Instead do one of the following:

Use `mconcat`:

```haskell
foo = mconcat
  [ "The quick brown fox jumps "
  , "over the lazy dog"
  ]
```

The above is preferred because it makes it easy to maintain the two-space indent and allows the use of `$` where other options do not.

For example:

```haskell
foo = mconcat
  [ "The quick brown fox jumps "
  , Text.pack $ reverse "over the lazy dog"
  ]
```

Use `(<>)`, keeping argument and operator aligned to two-spaces:

```haskell
foo = Text.pack
  (   "The quick brown fox jumps "
  <>  "over the lazy dog"
  )
```

### Point-free style ###

Avoid over-using point-free style. Again, use your discretion.

For example, this is hard to read:

```haskell
-- Bad:
f = (g .) . h
```
Whereas this is fine:

```haskell
unFooBar :: Foo -> Baz
unFooBar = Baz . unBar . unFoo
```
The point-free version needs to have a clarity benefit but we realize
that this is vague so use your discretion.

Cabal file formatting
---------------------

### Modules & libraries

Modules and libraries should go in alphabetical order inside corresponding
sections. You can put blank lines between groups in each section.

### Warnings ###

Code should be compilable with `-Wall` without warnings.


### Default extensions

The only allowed default extension is: `NoImplicitPrelude`
All other extensions need to be put in the relevant module.

## Language Extensions to avoid

1. Avoid `RecordWildCards` - use `NamedFieldPuns` instead. `RecordWildCards` makes it difficult to discern where record accessor functions come from, _especially_ when used with external libraries. This results in time wasted searching for the accessors. `NamedFieldPuns` forces you to be more explicit and is a better alternative.


2. Avoid `ViewPatterns` - `ViewPatterns` obfuscates what could have been readable code and incurs more cognitive overhead.

## OPTIONS_GHC pragma to avoid

1. `-Wno-incomplete-uni-patterns` - This a bad idea. GHC will not warn you if you have not explicitly handled all possible cases in your function definitions. This opens up the possibility of a runtime error.

2. `-Wno-partial-fields` - This will allow you to define a partial record accessor which opens you up to the possibility of a runtime error.
